Responsive web design patterns are quickly evolving, but there are a handful of established patterns that work well across the desktop and mobile devices.

Most layouts used by responsive web pages can be categorized into one of five patterns: mostly fluid, column drop, layout shifter, tiny tweaks, and off canvas. In some cases, a page may use a combination of patterns, for example column drop and off canvas. These patterns, originally identified by Luke Wroblewski, provide a solid starting point for any responsive page.

The patterns

For simplicity and ease of understanding, each the samples below were created with real markup using flexbox, typically with three content div's contained within a primary container div. Each sample was written starting with the smallest view first, and breakpoints were added when necessary. The flexbox layout mode is well supported for modern browsers, though may still require vendor prefixing for optimal support.

a) Mostly Fluid

The mostly fluid pattern consists primarily of a fluid grid. On large or medium screens, it usually remains the same size, simply adjusting the margins on wider screens.

On smaller screens, the fluid grid causes the main content to reflow, while columns are stacked vertically. One major advantage of this pattern is that it usually only requires one breakpoint between small screens and large screens.

b) Column drop

For full-width multi-column layouts, column drop simply stacks the columns vertically as the window width becomes too narrow for the content.

Eventually this results in all of the columns being stacked vertically. Choosing breakpoints for this layout pattern is dependent on the content and changes for each design.

c) Layout shifter

The layout shifter pattern is the most responsive pattern, with multiple breakpoints across several screen widths.

Key to this layout is the way content moves about, instead of reflowing and dropping below other columns. Due to the significant differences between each major breakpoint, it is more complex to maintain and likely involves changes within elements, not just overall content layout.

d) Off canvas

Rather than stacking content vertically, the off canvas pattern places less frequently used content—perhaps navigation or app menus—off screen, only showing it when the screen size is large enough, and on smaller screens, content is only a click away.